---
layout: post
title: M2-libco
subtitle: Operating Systems(jyy) 2024
date: 2024-04-04
categories: test
tags: programming courses
---

Reading the [guide page](https://jyywiki.cn/OS/2024/labs/M2.md) actually takes me a lot of time. This blog will not cover every details in the guide page, but I will share how I implement these coroutine functions and my ideas to this, following my desperate process when doing the lab... Because this lab is quite hard for me as a beginner to Operating Systems. Ultimately, I managed! I think it is of great satisfaction and achievement, so I decide to go on~

## M2: Coroutine Library (libco)

#### Objective Analysis

First, what is **coroutine**? From wikipedia, we learned that

> **Coroutines** are computer program components that allow execution to be suspended and resumed, generalizing subroutines for cooperative multitasking.

Take-away message is: **coroutines** are cooperative in nature, meaning they yield control *voluntarily*, allowing other coroutines to execute without the need for preemptive scheduling; while **threads** are *preemptive*, meaning the operating system can interrupt their execution and switch to another thread at any time.

In this lab, we need to implement the following three APIs:

```c
struct co *co_start(const char *name, void (*func)(void *), void *arg);
void       co_yield();
void       co_wait(struct co *co);
```

- `co_start(name, func, arg)`: **creates** a new coroutine and returns a pointer to `struct co`. 

  * The newly created coroutine starts executing from the function `func`, passing the argument `arg`. 

  * Using `malloc` to allocate memory.
  * Please design the `struct co` structure with more freedom.
  * The `main` coroutine should also be created and used.

- `co_wait(co)`: the current coroutine needs to **wait** until the coroutine `co` completes execution before continuing. 

  * The `struct co` allocated by `co_start` needs to be freed after the coroutine being waited for ends and before `co_wait()` returns.
  * Each coroutine can only be waited for by `co_wait` once

- `co_yield()`:  coroutine **switching**. 

  * The coroutine keeps running on the CPU until the `func` function returns or calls `co_yield` to temporarily relinquish execution. 
  * You can randomly choose one coroutine when there are multiple coroutines available.

More specific details of these will be discussed and analyzed later.

#### Usage of these APIs

There are two tests in ./test/main.c of the libco repository. Let's delve into the first one.

In `main` function, we first set the `stdout` buffer to be NULL, which means no buffer. Note: generally,

* normal file will use *fully buffer* `_IOFBF`
* `stdin` and `stdout`  will use *line buffer* `_IOLBF`
* `stderr` will use *no buffering* `_IO_NBF`

And then we will create two coroutines using `co_start` and wait them to execute by `co_wait`.

```c
int main() {
    setbuf(stdout, NULL);

    struct co *thd1 = co_start("thread-1", work, "X");
    struct co *thd2 = co_start("thread-2", work, "Y");

    co_wait(thd1);
    co_wait(thd2);

    return 0;
}
```

Our callback function `work` is a global counter that continuously increment a global variable `g_count`, and then prints the parameters of different coroutines (`X` and `Y`) and the corresponding variable values.

```c
int g_count = 0;			// a global variable
static void add_count() {	// WRITE shared memory
    g_count++;
}
static int get_count() {	// READ shared memory
    return g_count;
}
static void work(void *arg) {
    const char *s = (const char*)arg;
    for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i) {
        printf("%s%d  ", s, get_count());
        add_count();
        co_yield();
    }
}
```

We see that in the workloop, the coroutine will call `co_yield()` to switch the current coroutine. Therefore these two coroutine will alternatively print the according string. Our expected output is like:

```c
XO X1 Y2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 Y9 X1O Y11 Y12 Y13 X14 Y15 Y16 Y17 Y18 Y19 Y20
```

